Add kgateway scalability blog (#201)
kgateway-dev/kgateway.dev: content/blog/design-kgateway-for-scalability.md

---
title: Design kgateway for Scalability – Not All Gateways Are Created Equal
toc: false
publishDate: 2025-05-07T00:00:00-00:00
author: Lin Sun & Yuval Kohavi
---

With the Kubernetes Gateway API becoming the de facto standard for managing traffic into, out of, and within clusters, a growing number of gateways now implement this API. While gateways are often expected to "just work," choosing the right one can have major implications—especially at scale.

Before comparing features, the most critical consideration is whether a gateway is built on a solid, reliable foundation–the kind of foundation that just works.

## Aren’t All Envoy-Based Gateways the Same?

It's a fair question. Many gateways use the Envoy proxy under the hood to enforce routing, security, and other traffic policies. But despite sharing the same data plane, not all gateways are equal—because the **control plane** makes all the difference.

> The control plane is responsible for translating Kubernetes Gateway API resources into actual Envoy configuration. This translation layer can be simple for a few routes, but when you’re managing 20,000 resources (which will translate into 500,000+ lines of Envoy config), the efficiency and scalability of the control plane become critical—as I noted in a previous [LinkedIn post](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/lin-sun-a9b7a81_from-20000-kubernetes-gateway-resources-activity-7305695363049373696-UVNz?utm_source=share&utm_medium=member_desktop&rcm=ACoAAABLihcBuozqLyftNtauegAdN2-QszsmqQQ).

Reviewer: I would remove the LinkedIn post reference, it doesn't add anything new

Author: i like keep it in to keep history as that post has a lot of impressions.

## Designing kgateway for Scalability

> When we started building **Gloo** (now **kgateway**) seven years ago, we used a snapshot-based model that recalculated everything on every update—whether it was a new route, an update, or a backend change. This meant even small changes triggered a full control plane recalculation. With Kubernetes, where pods and backends change constantly, this was not scalable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we started building Gloo (now kgateway) seven years ago, we used a snapshot-based model that recalculated everything on every update—whether it was a new route, an update, or a backend change. This meant even small changes triggered a full control plane recalculation. With Kubernetes, where pods and backends change constantly, this was not scalable.
```

Call out that many other gateways do this today?

Managing resource dependencies via manual references like `targetRefs` and `extensionRefs` also proved cumbersome. Dependency resolution sometimes failed, creating reliability issues.

> Learning from that experience, we designed **kgateway** using the battle-tested [krt](https://github.com/istio/istio/blob/master/pkg/kube/krt/README.md) framework to handle dependency tracking automatically. Now, only the **affected objects** are re-translated when a change occurs—ensuring fast updates and efficient scaling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Learning from that experience, we designed kgateway using the battle-tested [krt](https://github.com/istio/istio/blob/master/pkg/kube/krt/README.md) framework to handle dependency tracking automatically. Now, only affected objects are re-translated when a change occurs—ensuring fast updates and efficient scaling.
```

> Let’s walk through a few core scenarios to illustrate how kgateway scales to support large teams and applications—starting with a setup of 10,000 routes and backends—and see how kgateway handles new routes, route update, deletion or control plane becomes unavailable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s walk through a few core scenarios to illustrate how kgateway scales to support large teams and applications, starting with a setup of 10,000 routes and backends, and see how kgateway handles new routes, route update, deletion or control plane becomes unavailable.
```

## Core Scalability Scenarios

> ### 1. When a New Route Is Added

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### When a New Route Is Added
```

In a production system with thousands of existing routes, adding a new one should be near-instant. Ideally, the route becomes effective within 1 second, without needing a periodic timer or restart. This ensures teams can test and deploy with confidence.

> {{< reuse-image src="blog/scalability-add-a-route.gif" width="750px" >}}

Reviewer: You can't see what's on screen in these GIFs, and they cycle very quickly.   It was only when I got to the end I realised that the video was included too.  Want to call that out?

> ### 2. When a Route Is Updated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### When a Route Is Updated
```

Updates to an existing route should not interrupt traffic. The old route should be replaced atomically, and the new route should take effect immediately. Any delay or downtime can lead to outages or security issues—especially in critical systems.

{{< reuse-image src="blog/scalability-modify-a-route.gif" width="750px" >}}

> ### 3. When a Route Is Removed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### When a Route Is Removed
```

Removing a route should instantly revoke access. Lingering routes, even for a few seconds, can pose security risks and violate compliance requirements.

{{< reuse-image src="blog/scalability-delete-a-route.gif" width="750px" >}}

> ### 4. When the Control Plane Is Restarted or Scaled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### When the Control Plane Is Restarted or Scaled
```

The system should remain fully operational when the control plane restarts or scales out. Since the Envoy proxies are already configured, their behavior should not be affected. Once the control plane returns, it should not trigger unnecessary reconfigurations if there’s been no change.

## Test These Scenarios Yourself

> 1. Install kgateway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Install kgateway](https://kgateway.dev/docs/quickstart/).
```

> 2. Create the `http` gateway proxy via the Gateway resource below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create the `http` gateway proxy using a Gateway resource:
```

```yaml
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
kind: Gateway
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
metadata:
 name: http
 namespace: kgateway-system
spec:
 gatewayClassName: kgateway
 listeners:
 - protocol: HTTP
   port: 8080
   name: http
   allowedRoutes:
     namespaces:
       from: All
EOF
```

> 3. **(Optional)** Install the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://kgateway.dev/docs/observability/#otel) and [kube-prometheus-stack](https://kgateway.dev/docs/observability/#grafana) to observe CPU/memory and Envoy metrics. Make sure your cluster has adequate resources before doing this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **(Optional)** Install the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://kgateway.dev/docs/observability/#otel) and [kube-prometheus-stack](https://kgateway.dev/docs/observability/#grafana) to observe CPU, memory and Envoy metrics. (Make sure your cluster has adequate resources if doing this.)
```

> 4. Clone the [kgateway repo](https://github.com/kgateway-dev/kgateway). From the cloned directory, load 10,000 routes and backends (starting from 0 to 9999). Send a few random requests to confirm routes are effective immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Clone the [kgateway repo](https://github.com/kgateway-dev/kgateway). From the cloned directory, use the `applier` utilitiy to load 10,000 routes and backends (from 0 to 9999). Send a few random requests to confirm routes are effective immediately.
```

```bash

> wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/linsun/gateway-tests/refs/heads/main/scale/routes.yaml
> hack/utils/applier/go run main.go apply -f routes.yaml --iterations 10000

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cd hack/utils/applier
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/linsun/gateway-tests/refs/heads/main/scale/routes.yaml
go run main.go apply -f routes.yaml --iterations 10000
```

kubectl port-forward deployment/http -n kgateway-system 8080:8080 &
curl http://localhost:8080/foo/9
curl http://localhost:8080/foo/99
curl http://localhost:8080/foo/9999
```

> 5. **Add the 10,000th route and backend**, and check if the request to the newly added route is effective immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Add the 10,001st route and backend, and check if the request to the newly added route is effective immediately.
```

if they're zero based this will be 10,001

Author: i would be 10000 :) because the first cmd loads 0 to 9999.

```bash
hack/utils/applier/go run main.go apply -f ~/Documents/blogs/kgateway-scale/scale/routes.yaml --start 10000 --iterations 1
curl http://localhost:8080/foo/10000
```

> 6. **Update the 10,000th route**. Send the request with `-v` (verbose); you should see the response header `hello: kgateway` being added:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Update the 10,001st route. Send the request with `-v` (verbose); you should see the response header `hello: kgateway` being added:
```

```yaml
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
 generation: 1
 name: route-10000
 namespace: default
spec:
 parentRefs:
 - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
   kind: Gateway
   name: http
   namespace: kgateway-system
 rules:
 - backendRefs:
   - group: gateway.kgateway.dev
     kind: Backend
     name: backend-10000
     weight: 1
   filters:
   - type: URLRewrite
     urlRewrite:
       path:
         replacePrefixMatch: /anything/
         type: ReplacePrefixMatch
   - type: ResponseHeaderModifier
     responseHeaderModifier:
       add:
         - name: hello
           value: kgateway
   matches:
   - path:
       type: PathPrefix
       value: /foo/10000
EOF
curl http://localhost:8080/foo/10000 -v
```

> 7. **Delete the 10,000th route**, and confirm the route is no longer functional:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Delete the 10,001st route, and confirm the route is no longer functional:
```

```bash
kubectl delete httproute route-10000
curl http://localhost:8080/foo/10000
```

> 8. **Delete the kgateway control plane**. The CPU/memory of the Envoy proxy managed by the control plane should remain stable, and all requests should continue to work:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Delete the kgateway control plane. The CPU/memory of the Envoy proxy managed by the control plane should remain stable, and all requests should continue to work:
```

 namespace: kgateway-system
spec:
 gatewayClassName: kgateway
 listeners:
 - protocol: HTTP
   port: 8080
   name: http
   allowedRoutes:
     namespaces:
       from: All
EOF
```

3. **(Optional)** Install the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://kgateway.dev/docs/observability/#otel) and [kube-prometheus-stack](https://kgateway.dev/docs/observability/#grafana) to observe CPU, memory and Envoy metrics. (Make sure your cluster has adequate resources if doing this.)

4. Clone the [kgateway repo](https://github.com/kgateway-dev/kgateway). From the cloned directory, use the `applier` utilitiy to load 10,000 routes and backends (from 0 to 9999). Send a few random requests to confirm routes are effective immediately.

```bash
cd hack/utils/applier
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/linsun/gateway-tests/refs/heads/main/scale/routes.yaml
go run main.go apply -f routes.yaml --iterations 10000
kubectl port-forward deployment/http -n kgateway-system 8080:8080 &
curl http://localhost:8080/foo/9
curl http://localhost:8080/foo/99
curl http://localhost:8080/foo/9999
```

5. Add the 10,001st route and backend, and check if the request to the newly added route is effective immediately.

```bash

> hack/utils/applier/go run main.go apply -f ~/Documents/blogs/kgateway-scale/scale/routes.yaml --start 10000 --iterations 1

Author: ```suggestion
go run main.go apply -f routes.yaml --start 10000 --iterations 1
```
